release: v1.11.0 release (#12561)
longhorn/longhorn: CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.11.0.md

# Longhorn v1.11.0 Release Notes

The Longhorn team is excited to announce the release of Longhorn v1.11.0. This release marks a major milestone, with the **V2 Data Engine** officially entering the **Technical Preview** stage following significant stability improvements.

Additionally, this version optimizes the stability of the whole system and introduces critical improvements in resource observability, scheduling, and utilization.

For terminology and background on Longhorn releases, see [Releases](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn#releases).

## Deprecation

### V2 Backing Image Deprecation

The Backing Image feature for the V2 Data Engine is now deprecated in v1.11.0 and is scheduled for removal in v1.12.0.

> Users utilizing V2 volumes for virtual machines are encouraged to adopt the [Containerized Data Importer (CDI)](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/containerized_data_importer/) for volume population instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users using V2 volumes for virtual machines are encouraged to adopt the [Containerized Data Importer (CDI)](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/containerized_data_importer/) for volume population instead.
```

[GitHub Issue #12237](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12237)

## Primary Highlights

### V2 Data Engine

#### Now in Technical Preview Stage

> We are pleased to announce that the V2 Data Engine has officially graduated to the **Technical Preview Stage**. This indicates increased stability and feature maturity as we move toward General Availability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are pleased to announce that the V2 Data Engine has officially graduated to the **Technical Preview** stage. This indicates increased stability and feature maturity as we move toward General Availability.
```

> **Limitation:** While the engine is in Technical Preview, live upgrade is not supported yet. V2 volumes must be detached (offline) before engine upgrade.

#### Support for `ublk` Frontend

> Users can now configure `ublk` (Userspace Block Device) as the frontend for V2 Data Engine volumes. This capability of the parameter tuning makes it being a high-performance alternative to the Nvme-oF frontend for environments with Kernel v6.0+ that support it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can now configure `ublk` (Userspace Block Device) as the frontend for V2 Data Engine volumes. This provides a high-performance alternative to the NVMe-oF frontend for environments running Kernel v6.0+.
```

- [BUG] RWX volume becomes unavailable after drain node [12226](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12226) - @yangchiu @mantissahz
- [BUG] invalid memory address or nil pointer dereference [11939](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/11939) - @bachmanity1 @roger-ryao
- [BUG] share-manager excessive memory usage [11938](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/11938) - @derekbit @chriscchien
- [BUG] Encrypted Volume Cannot Be Expanded Online [12366](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12366) - @yangchiu @chriscchien
- [BUG] Backing image download gets stuck after network disconnection [11622](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/11622) - @COLDTURNIP @chriscchien
- [BUG] Can not delete the parent of volume head snapshot of a v2 volume [9064](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/9064) - @yulken @chriscchien
- [BUG] changing of the volume controller owner caused: BUG: multiple engines detected when volume is detached [1755](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/1755) - @PhanLe1010 @chriscchien

> - [BUG] mounting error is not properly hanedled during CSI node publish volume [12006](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12006) - @COLDTURNIP @yangchiu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [BUG] mounting error is not properly handled during CSI node publish volume [12006](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12006) - @COLDTURNIP @yangchiu
```

  [GitHub Issue #10512](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/10512)

#### Node Disk Health Monitoring

  Longhorn now actively monitors the physical health of the underlying disks used for storage by using S.M.A.R.T. data. This allows administrators to identify issues and raise alerts when abnormal SMART metrics are detected, helping prevent failed volumes.

  [GitHub Issue #12016](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12016)

#### Share Manager Networking

  Users can now configure an extra network interface for the Share Manager to support complex network segmentation requirements.

  [GitHub Issue #10269](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/10269)

#### ReadWriteOncePod (RWOP) Support
  
  Full support for the Kubernetes `ReadWriteOncePod` access mode has been added.

  [GitHub Issue #9727](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/9727)

#### StorageClass `allowedTopologies` Support

  Administrators can now use the `allowedTopologies` field in Longhorn StorageClasses to restrict volume provisioning to specific zones, regions, or nodes within the cluster.

  [GitHub Issue #12261](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12261)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Longhorn v1.11.0 Release Notes

The Longhorn team is excited to announce the release of Longhorn v1.11.0. This release marks a major milestone for the **V2 Data Engine**, which officially moves to the **Preview Stage** following the resolution of a large number of bugs and defects.

Additionally, this release improves overall system stability and introduces critical enhancements in resource observability, scheduling, and utilization.

For terminology and background on Longhorn releases, see [Releases](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn#releases).

## Deprecation

### V2 Backing Image Deprecation

The Backing Image feature for the V2 Data Engine is deprecated in v1.11.0 and is scheduled for removal in v1.12.0.

Users who use V2 volumes for virtual machines are encouraged to adopt the [Containerized Data Importer (CDI)](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/containerized_data_importer/) for volume population instead.

[GitHub Issue #12237](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12237)

## Primary Highlights

### V2 Data Engine

#### Now in Preview Stage

We are pleased to announce that the V2 Data Engine has officially graduated to the **Preview Stage**. This indicates increased stability and feature maturity as it progresses toward General Availability.

> **Limitation:** While the engine is in Preview, live upgrade is not supported. V2 volumes must be detached (offline) before an engine upgrade.

#### Support for `ublk` Frontend

Users can now configure `ublk` (Userspace Block Device) as the frontend for V2 Data Engine volumes. This provides a high-performance alternative to the NVMe-oF frontend for environments running kernel v6.0 or later.

[GitHub Issue #11039](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/11039)

### V1 Data Engine

#### Faster Replica Rebuilding from Multiple Sources

The V1 Data Engine now supports parallel replica rebuilding. When a replica needs to be rebuilt, the engine can stream data from multiple healthy replicas simultaneously instead of a single source. This significantly reduces the time required to restore redundancy for volumes with highly fragmented data.

[GitHub Issue #11331](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/11331)

### General

#### Balance-Aware Disk Selection for Replica Scheduling

Longhorn improves replica scheduling by introducing a `balance-aware` disk selection algorithm, reducing uneven storage utilization across nodes and disks.

[GitHub Issue #10512](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/10512)

#### Node Disk Health Monitoring

Longhorn now monitors the physical health of underlying storage disks using S.M.A.R.T. data. This allows administrators to detect issues and receive alerts when abnormal SMART metrics are observed, helping prevent volume failures.

[GitHub Issue #12016](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12016)

#### Share Manager Networking

Users can now configure an additional network interface for the Share Manager to support complex network segmentation requirements.

[GitHub Issue #10269](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/10269)

#### ReadWriteOncePod (RWOP) Support

Full support for the Kubernetes `ReadWriteOncePod` access mode has been added.

[GitHub Issue #9727](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/9727)

#### StorageClass `allowedTopologies` Support

Administrators can now use the `allowedTopologies` field in Longhorn StorageClasses to restrict volume provisioning to specific zones, regions, or nodes within the cluster.

[GitHub Issue #12261](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/12261)
```

## Installation

>  [!IMPORTANT]
**Ensure that your cluster is running Kubernetes v1.25 or later before installing Longhorn v1.11.0.**

You can install Longhorn using a variety of tools, including Rancher, Kubectl, and Helm. For more information about installation methods and requirements, see [Quick Installation](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.11.0/deploy/install/) in the Longhorn documentation.

## Upgrade

>  [!IMPORTANT]
**Ensure that your cluster is running Kubernetes v1.25 or later before upgrading from Longhorn v1.10.x to v1.11.0.**

Longhorn only allows upgrades from supported versions. For more information about upgrade paths and procedures, see [Upgrade](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.11.0/deploy/upgrade/) in the Longhorn documentation.

## Post-Release Known Issues

For information about issues identified after this release, see [Release-Known-Issues](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/wiki/Release-Known-Issues).

> ## Resolved Issues in this release

Reviewer: There are a couple of typos in the issue title (e.g, form -> from, lonbghorn-manager -> longhorn-manager). Consider correcting them in the original issue and here.
